One, two, three, four. One, two, three. Can we do
that too? One, two, three, four. This is December
the 12th, year 2000, down in the Jack Kenny
Williams Administration Building. I have the
honor and pleasure of chatting with Mary Ruth
Patronella, whose title now is... Assistant to
the Dean. Assistant to the Dean of Agriculture.
want to record her memories of what it has been like
to be a member of the staff here for a good many
years. First, introduce yourself to anyone who
might read or hear this. Where did you grow up? What
did your family do? Where did you go to school? And
so forth. OK. I was born in Edge, Texas, which is in
the northern part of the county. I went to school at
Edge. They had elementary and about two grades, I
believe, in high school. Then I came to Brine High
and graduated from Brine. What year? 1938. How
many in the senior class? I could find that out, but
I don't have it from memory because I have the
program for our graduation. You lived out in the
country? I lived in the country and rode the bus to
Brine. After I graduated, I didn't feel like that I
could go to college, and I didn't have a job. Being
out in the country, I guess I just didn't know what I
was supposed to do. So I went back to Bryan High and
took postgraduate work and worked in the
principal's office. My daddy knew D.W. Williams,
and he asked Mr. Williams about my finding
employment in the animal science department he
was head. And he said he needed someone who had
experience. And I had no experience. I don't
really remember how I but got a job in the division
of poultry science, which is part of the
experiment station located on the F&B station.
But my first job was at the poultry house to count
egg records, where they had sheets for a hen and
made stick marks. And I counted those stick marks
first. And when did you go to work on the campus?
That was December of 39. December of 39. Do you
remember what your pay was? The only question I'm
going to ask about money, do you remember what your
first pay was? I'm trying to think. I think it was $2
a day, and we worked five and a half days, so I
probably made about $11 a week. And you lived at
home. I lived with friends in Bryanville. Oh,
okay. How did you get back and forth on the campus?
We used to have carpools. And the car would be full.
People would go around to the different homes and
get a car full and come to Texas A&M. Describe the
campus in those days. What was it like? What were
the major buildings? Well, where I was is out at
F&B. And there was poultry, dairy, and swine. And
they each had these frame houses, offices. And the
person in charge of the unit was called chief.
Chief. Chief. Chief of the division. Who was the,
was poultry science even a separate department
then? It was a division of the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. And it was before the
coordination of teaching, research, and
extension. That didn't happen, I think, until
about 1947. And your normal work day was an eight to
five? Yes, sir. Eight to five. What about lunch?
Well, I guess we carried our lunch. We had sack
lunches. How was a young woman treated on the
campus then? Well, I think, well, you know, of
course, as I say, I was out off the campus, really,
to start. So you didn't see many students? No, I
didn't see many students out there. You were
counting these eggs. That was part of the
experiment, the search? Yes, sir. Was there a
particular person whose work y'all were
watching? We did, I don't know whether you
remember Russell Couch and Lee James? Mm-hmm.
were there and when the war started they had
commissions and went into the service. So what
happened to your accounts? Then we had some people
come in and I'm trying to think one of them was named
Dr. Mellis and then someone named Baker. How's
Mellis spelled? M-E-L-L-A-I-S-S
I think I'm not sure I can't remember but I remember
his name was Vivian And he said, you know, that was a
lady's name and he didn't, he wanted to be called
V.H.
instead of Vivian.
When you started work, the war in Europe already
was underway. Yes, sir. How much did y'all, did
that affect your life here in Bryan and the campus?
And there's gas rationing, so. Well, no, no, not
yet. In 39 and 40. No, no, not then. But the war, you
know, affects. During the war, they had a policy
that they changed the time you went to work or you
could go to work from 8 to 7. How long did you stay
with Polter Science? Until October of. 41, I
believe that that's. And then, so what was your?
Then my husband was called into the service. And,
no, I'm telling you wrong, Doctor. It wasn't 41. It
must have been later than that. 43. So when, you got
married when? In December, I mean October 1941.
And your husband, what was his profession? He
owned a restaurant in Brown. At that time. Okay.
But you continued to work here on the campus.
Continued to work on the campus. Do you remember
where you were when you heard the news on December
7, 1941? Yes, sir, I do. Describe that, please. We
were, my parents lived in the country. We went out
there every Sunday or every other Sunday. And we
were on our way to Edge when we heard that about,
Pearl Harbor being bombed. Did you or your husband
or anyone else guess as to how your life might be
changed by that? Not at the time, I don't think. Did
you know where Pearl Harbor was? Not really. Not
really. I didn't. When I heard it, I just knew it was
somewhere on the other side of the world. All
right. And was he in the reserve? No, sir. He was
drafted. drafted and your new task then that your
second slot here on the campus was where? Your
second job. In the Department of Animal Science,
Animal Husbandry at the time. And where
physically? Animal Industries Building. The
first job I had there though was bookkeeper for the
Meats Laboratory. Who was the department head
then? I'm trying to think. Seemed like Mr.
Dahlberg was interim.
And a young man named O.D. Butler, was he? Well, he
was, when he came back from the war, he, Dr. Jack
Miller was head. And there were about three people
there that Dr. Miller suggested they go to
graduate school. And one of them was O.D. Was O.D.
And Bill Warren and George Robertson. All right,
so you worked there throughout the war. That puts
you on the campus. Describe what happened here
during the war. What was the campus like? Well, you
know, it's hard for me to remember exactly what it
was like, Dr. Monroe. I know that, of course, a lot
of the students, you know, had to go to the service.
And I don't know what their enrollment really was.
Were you as a woman treated politely here on
campus? I think I've always been treated
politely. And
so the I know that the campus went to a trimester
system and they went to class 12 months a year to get
everybody out faster. Did the enrollment go down?
You know, when I started, as I say, I was a
bookkeeper in the meats lab. And they were killing
cattle for the dining halls, for the markets and
brine, because there was no other slaughter
plant. And we had about 220 lockers down in the
basement. And so we were, I was really involved in
that. And we made a report to the board of directors
every month. We would bind up a financial report.
And so there would have been a big cash flow. And I
would come to the this building where the fiscal
office and bring the money you know that we would
our sales fund and we had a cash riding machine and
we had someone buying cattle and the department
paid him a dollar a head to do that was Mr. Yeager.
Yeager? Yeager. Y-E-A-G-E-R? Yes, sir. And he,
W.O. Yeager. And I could write, had the check
writing machine and pay him and then get
reimbursed. And this was not part of any research
or anything. No. This was a cash operation. This
was an operation. I don't know how they got
started, but they had been without someone to do
that work for about two months. When I came over,
they had some gentleman that was doing it first.
Where was the slaughtering operation located?
West of the tracks? No, it was over here in the
Animal Industries building. Oh, okay. There were
those holding pens beside the building and the
killing floor and cutting room. Who did that? Were
they hired or were they students? No, there was a
staff. Okay. And that went on through the war? Yes,
sir. I'm not sure when they... Well, they still
have some, but they... Then they got to have the
co-op, I believe, has a slaughter plant or
something. And the lockers, they took all those
out. The range line ecology and management is in
that department, in that building now. Now, they
bought the cattle from this general area. I
suppose so. A wide variety of cattle? No specific?
No specific. And your task continued through the
war. Well, there was a time when the animal science
department didn't have a secretary. So I go up to
the departments head's office and I become the
secretary and they hired someone to take my place
as bookkeeper. Oh okay and you who was the
department head then when you were the department
secretary? Part of the time it was Dr. Jack Miller
and as I say he went he left here I'm not sure when and
went to Tennessee and came back as department
head. I think when it was, when he came back it was
when they coordinated the research, teaching,
and extension. Describe the variety of tasks that
the departmental secretary had to handle. Well,
we did, we took shorthand, we filed, answered the
phone,
And describe what kind of typewriter you used.
Well, I had a manual typewriter first. And we had,
you know, correcting those copies that you had to
have carbon paper wasn't too much fun. Now, you had
taken typing and shorthand at Bryan High.
What kind of work hours did the departmental
secretary have to put in? We put in eight hours. And
at that, we finally got to where only one girl and
one faculty member had to be at work on Saturdays.
We took turns doing that. And you were still living
out in the country? No, I was married then and
living in Bryan. Oh, you were living in. And during
the war, with gas rationing and so forth, describe
how that changed your routine. I managed okay with
the rationing. I guess we just didn't drive too
much. When I went to California, I went up to the
rationing board and got the ration to drive to
California. So I drove our car all the way from here
to California, and about that time they reduced
the number of gallons you could get per coupon, but
I still made it all right. Now, were you going out
there to see your husband? Yes. He was in Army?
Army. Army. And you didn't drive by yourself. He
had a friend whose wife was in Illinois. She rode
the train to Hearn, and I picked her up, and she went
with me. Do you remember how long it took you to
drive it? We drove to Midland, I think, one day, and
about Mesa, Arizona the next, and then into Los
Angeles the following day, about three days. And
was he going overseas, or had he already... At that
time, he wasn't. They were a training cadre. But
then he was moved to Oregon, and he was one of the
ones that they took out of that... and filled a unit
that was going overseas. And served in the
Pacific? No, in Europe, in Italy. In Italy? Oh, oh.
So instead of California to the Pacific, he went
to... We came back home, had a little bit of time to
come back home and drive the car home. And then he
went, in about six days, he went back to be shipped
to overseas. As far as you can recall, other than
gas, what other things were most hard to obtain
during the war? One was sugar, shoes. I may still
have some coupons. What about nylon stockings?
Well, I don't really remember much about that,
probably.
Describe the area around the campus. What was
College Station like during those years? Well, if
you, when I think of it, this building kind of sat
out here by itself. The Animal Industries
Building and Scotes Hall and maybe some buildings
that used to be the Experiment Station
headquarters. It was certainly not built up like
it is today. Where did you park your car? Over by the
building. Right behind the building. And I got a
station wagon without power steering one time,
and when they started you know, giving people
assigned parking spaces. Dr. Butler gave me one in
front of the Animal Industries building. And I
didn't want that because it was a little hard for me
to park it. So I asked him if I could just not have a
parking place, and I still parked over by the
building. He always said, if you got here early
enough, you found a parking place. So I usually did
that. Now, when you first came over to animal
science, who was the dean of agriculture then? Dr.
Kyle, Dean Kyle. Describe him. We don't know much
about Dean Kyle. Well, I remember him coming to my
office and telling me how he appreciated what I was
doing with the meat slab work. And of course, I
didn't know him very well either. Physically,
what did he look like? Big, small? Seems to me like,
I really can't say, but we've got pictures of him
back here in the office. Outgoing personality?
Shy? What? Well, you know, really, I didn't have
that much contact with him. I just remember him
coming in my office and letting me know that he
appreciated what I was doing. Who was the next
dean? I believe it was Shepardson. Describe him.
What was he like? Well, of course, being where I
was, I didn't have much. I've got this for you that
gives you the time for these deans. I'd have to look
at it myself to really... He's 44 to 55.
When the veterans came back, well let's see, in
your family, when did the key men in your life come
back? October, I believe, of 45. uh and I hope no
injuries well he was he did get the Purple Heart and
the Oakleaf Cluster but it wasn't anything that
was severe shot through the thigh and then got
shrapnel in the shoulder so he went back into the
his restaurant a restaurant and you all still
lived in town Did you ever think during that period
of stopping work on campus? No, sir. Not until my
oldest son was born. That's when I stopped at that
time. And I really didn't have an idea that I would
come back. So I got my teacher retirement money
out. When was that? That was in December of 49. 49.
And Pat was born 28th of January. And so you thought
you were retiring. Well, what led you to come back?
Dr. Butler was, Dr. O.D. Butler was head of the
department. He had someone in the bookkeeping
department who wanted to retire. Her name was
Bessie Lou Smith. And so he called me and asked me if
I would come back. But she wasn't leaving at that
point. So it took about six months before she
really left. And he would call me once in a while and
ask me what I was thinking or how I felt about it. And
describe this man, O.D. Butler. He was a general.
He was a fine person to work for. I enjoyed that very
much. See, I went to high school in Orange where he
grew up. I did not know him over there. I knew his
brother who was a very active civic leader. And so
when you said he was general, I know he was a firm
person. Yes, he was. Did he also know how to relax?
Did he have a sense of humor? Yes, he did. And I think
he relaxed. I think he played golf.
But I would go to the department meetings, and he
would always tease Dr. Kunkel about not being
married. And he did that to Cliff Laywell. And he
was very outspoken, and he said what he thought.
What were his joys? What did he enjoy most? Well, I
think he was chair of the Athletic Council. And I
think also while I was working for him, he bought
the land that they now own out here. I probably
typed some of those letters. South of the campus
down on Welborn Road. Yes, sir. And it belonged to
the Jones family. He and Edsel Jones, his
brother-in-law, were buying some of that land
together. Have any idea when that was? No, sir, I
really don't. Early 50s, maybe? Probably. And did
he... No, it probably... I wasn't here in the early
50s, so... Now, when did you come back to work? uh
august of 58 58 might have been later at 50s okay i'm
not real sure did he uh put cattle on that land
quickly i think i think he did uh again uh dr butler
what were some things that he did not want someone
in the office staff to do what were some guidelines
y'all knew never
really had any problem with that i don't think
because I always decided, you know, that I was
going to be at work when I was supposed to be at work.
But like, did he allow people to smoke in the
office? Could you drink coffee? We probably would
drink coffee, but I don't remember anybody
smoking.
And the Dean of Agriculture, when you came back to
work in the late 50s, who, that was Dr. Watkins, Gus
Watkins. Dr. Watkins, one of the Dean very long, so
I didn't have much contact with him. Dr.
Patterson. Yes, I knew Dr. Patterson. Dr. Kunkel
came over here as associate director of the
experiment station, and when Dr. Lewis left, Dr.
Patterson came down and was the super dean, where
we call it vice chancellor now. They were called
dean, but not, and he would, Dr. Patterson said he
wasn't a dean like these other deans here on
campus. In fact, he didn't want his picture hung
out here with them. He was on the other side.
Because he was both dean and director. And
director of the Experiment Station over the
Extension Service. Now, for you at the
departmental level, in the animal science, did
that super dean task complicate your job? See I
came over here soon after he was super dean. Dr.
Kunkel came in December of 62 and I came in March of
63. So I didn't have much time. For whom did you
work? When I came over here, Dr. Kunkel first as
associate director. Make believe I don't know
Harry Kunkel. Tell me about Harry Kunkel. Well,
Dr. Kunkel, of course, was a professor in animal
science and biochemistry and biophysics. And Dr.
Patterson chose him to be associate director. So
he called me one day, I guess around March, before
March, and asked me to bring something over here,
this building, and I was going to send a runner. And
he told me, no, come yourself. So I came over, and he
said, how would you like to work over here? And Dr.
Butler said that the one he used to be over now was
over him and was taking his secretary. Uh-oh,
uh-oh. And so I came over here at that time.
Describe your duties. When I came over here, Dr.
Patterson was letting Dr. Kunkel pretty much run
the experiment station, you know, the experiment
station budgets. And we used to, while we have more
people now, we would get the contracts and check
those out, write the letters, and they would be
signing the contracts and grants And this office
has changed a lot. We used to have the project
records over on the other side. About how many, how
large was the staff in the office when you first
came over? Not very large. Maybe 10 or so, I don't
know. We had human resources with one man and one,
lady and you were located in this area i was right up
right out here um so on the south end of and everyone
called it the system building right uh and uh
parking was still simple right right um where did
y'all eat lunch then still i guess we're bringing
our lunch i didn't go anywhere usually at lunch
Well, at the time, when my husband came back, I used
to drive down to the restaurant and eat there at
lunch. Now, what was the name of the restaurant?
Sam's Luncheonette. Where was it located? At
first, it was on Main Street where they took out a
lot of buildings, several buildings, and had
Woolworth Building, but he was next to First
National Bank to start with. Now, his family, when
did they first come to Brazos County? early this
century? Yes, sir, I would say so. And what about
your family? My family lived at Edge. No, but how
many generations? When did the... I'm not sure.
Did your grandparents live out there? My
grandparents did, but their parents, I think,
came from Tennessee or Kentucky.
Back over here, describe Dean Kunkel's
personality.
Sense of humor? I think he has a sense of humor. And
when did he get married? You said that O.D. teased
him about getting... Well, you know... Was he
married? It was probably around 59. Okay, that's
what I... I think 59. I thought so. Now, he's an
Aggie, had lived in one of the project houses, grew
up... Is he from Warda? I know George Kunze... No,
sir, he's not. He's from Arnie. Oh, that's right,
that's right, out on the high plains. But of
German... German descent. German descent.
The... And you say that he... Day to day, he ran the
experiment station. And Dr. Patterson, was his
office located in this area? Yes, sir, on the other
side, right across the hall over there, where the
secretaries are now. What was his specialty, Dr.
Patterson's? He was a geneticist. Geneticist.
And this says that he was here until 1967.
about the time you came back to work a man named Earl
Rudder came as president do you remember when you
first saw him or met him or anything I remember
mostly the name and being in a meeting where he
spoke and but I didn't have any you know really
contacts
with My contacts were with Dean and Director of the
Experiment Station, mainly. Did you ever have any
contact, though, with his office staff? Yes,
some. Who? Nelda? Jerry Hunt. Jerry Hunt, uh-huh.
I believe Jerry Hunt was there. Describe Jerry.
Well, I remember she was very involved in working
for Mr. Rutter, and I've heard tell that Lesters,
who was a... The store sent her dresses to try on
that she didn't have to go. But I think she was, her
time was pretty much taken without Mr. Rutter. Did
you see Mr. Rutter moving around this building and
around the campus much? No, sir, I didn't. I
believe he may have moved upstairs, though. You
know, the president's office used to be on the
second floor of this building. Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
but I'm lost on just the timing of that. The
agriculture program during the 60s, did you feel
it was growing, making progress? Oh, yes, sir. I
have brought you something Dr. Kunkel, while he
was a super dean, and he did this report, so I
thought you might be interested in some of the
things that happened during that time.
Enrollments and budgets and things that came into
being for the first time. The research and
extension centers that were built during that
time. And I don't think there's been any other
added since those years when they really,
research and extension centers were built. Did
those of you in agriculture in the 60s, did you all
feel progress was being made? Yes, I think so. And
there was growth and so forth. We got enrollment
growth and ranking right up with the top.
Do you remember any fun events, humor? Christmas
parties, birthday parties, what? I know we had
them, but I don't remember any special events, I
don't think. Don't remember any electricity
going off? No. Somebody forgetting their speech
or anything like that? Do you remember when Mr.
Rutter became ill?
I remember him lying in state out here in Rotunda.